Childhood growth and its sensitivity to dietary protein is reviewed within a Protein-Stat
model of growth regulation. The coordination of growth of muscle and stature is a combination of
genetic programming, and of two-way mechanical interactions involving the mechanotransduction
of muscle growth through stretching by bone length growth, the core Protein-Stat feature, and the
strengthening of bone through muscle contraction via the mechanostat. Thus, growth in bone length
is the initiating event and this is always observed. Endocrine and cellular mechanisms of growth
in stature are reviewed in terms of the growth hormone-insulin like growth factor-1 (GH-IGF-1)
and thyroid axes and the sex hormones, which together mediate endochondral ossification in the
growth plate and bone lengthening. Cellular mechanisms of muscle growth during development
are then reviewed identifying (a) the difficulties posed by the need to maintain its ultrastructure
during myofibre hypertrophy within the extracellular matrix and the concept of muscle as concentric
“bags” allowing growth to be conceived as bag enlargement and filling, (b) the cellular and molecular
mechanisms involved in the mechanotransduction of satellite and mesenchymal stromal cells, to
enable both connective tissue remodelling and provision of new myonuclei to aid myofibre hypertro-
phy and (c) the implications of myofibre hypertrophy for protein turnover within the myonuclear
domain. Experimental data from rodent and avian animal models illustrate likely changes in DNA
domain size and protein turnover during developmental and stretch-induced muscle growth and
between different muscle fibre types. Growth of muscle in male rats during adulthood suggests that
“bag enlargement” is achieved mainly through the action of mesenchymal stromal cells. Current un-
derstanding of the nutritional regulation of protein deposition in muscle, deriving from experimental
studies in animals and human adults, is reviewed, identifying regulation by amino acids, insulin
and myofibre volume changes acting to increase both ribosomal capacity and efficiency of muscle
protein synthesis via the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and the phenomenon
of a “bag-full” inhibitory signal has been identified in human skeletal muscle. The final section
deals with the nutritional sensitivity of growth of muscle and stature to dietary protein in children.
Growth in length/height as a function of dietary protein intake is described in the context of the
breastfed child as the normative growth model, and the “Early Protein Hypothesis” linking high
protein intakes in infancy to later adiposity. The extensive paediatric studies on serum IGF-1 and
child growth are reviewed but their clinical relevance is of limited value for understanding growth
regulation; a role in energy metabolism and homeostasis, acting with insulin to mediate adiposity,
is probably more important. Information on the influence of dietary protein on muscle mass per
se as opposed to lean body mass is limited but suggests that increased protein intake in children
is unable to promote muscle growth in excess of that linked to genotypic growth in length/height.
One possible exception is milk protein intake, which cohort and cross-cultural studies suggest can
increase height and associated muscle growth, although such effects have yet to be demonstrated by
randomised controlled trials.